docs: document index module (#12594)
medusajs/medusa: www/apps/book/app/learn/fundamentals/module-links/index-module/page.mdx

export const metadata = {

>   title: `${pageNumber} Index Module`,

Reviewer: comment: Don't make this change yet, I will need to discuss naming with Seb 😄 
```suggestion
  title: `${pageNumber} Index`,
```

Reviewer: If we choose to go with `Index` instead of `the Index Module`, this will of cause need to be reflected across the docs.

}

# {metadata.title}

In this chapter, you'll learn about the Index Module and how you can use it.

<Note type="soon" title="Experimental">

> The Index Module is an experimental feature that's subject to change. It is not recommended for production use.

Reviewer: todo: For some users, the index engine is critical to removing bottlenecks, so I think we should tone this down. 
```suggestion
The Index Module is experimental and still in development, so it is subject to change. Consider whether your application can tolerate minor issues before using it in production.
```

</Note>

## What is the Index Module?

> The Index Module adds a method to [Query](../query/page.mdx) that allows you to filter data by linked modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Index Module is a tool to perform highly performant queries across modules, for example, to filter linked modules.
```

While modules share the same database by default, Medusa [isolates modules](../../modules/isolation/page.mdx) to allow using external data sources or different database types.

So, when you retrieve data across modules using Query, Medusa aggregates the data coming from diffeent modules to create the end result. This approach limits your ability to filter data by linked modules. For example, you can't filter products (created in the Product Module) by their brand (created in the Brand Module).

> The Index Module solves this problem by injesting data into a central data store on application start up. The data store has a relational structure that enables efficiently filtering the data injested from different modules (and their data stores). So, when you retrieve data with the Index Module, you're retrieving them from the injested data store, not the original data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Index Module solves this problem by ingesting data into a central data store on application startup. The data store has a relational structure that enables efficiently filtering data ingested from different modules (and their data stores). So, when you retrieve data with the Index Module, you're retrieving it from the Index' data store, not the original data source.
```

![Diagram showcasing how data is retrieved from the Index Module's data store](https://res.cloudinary.com/dza7lstvk/image/upload/v1747988533/Medusa%20Book/index-module_epurmt.jpg)

> ### Injested Data Models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Ingested Data Models
```

> Currently, only the following data models are injested by the Index Module when you install it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, only the following core data models are ingested into Index when you install it:
```

- `Product`
- `ProductVariant`
- `Price`
- `SalesChannel`

Future versions may add more data models to the list.

> 

Reviewer: todo: Should we explain what this means?

For example:

> Consequently, you can only index custom data models if they are linked to one of these four. We are continuously adding more core entities to the Index, as we see the demand for it.

Reviewer: I realise this is mentioned later, but I still think we can add a short comment here and link to the section below.

---

## How to Install the Index Module

To install the Index Module, run the following command in your Medusa project to install its package:

```bash npm2yarn
npm install @medusajs/index
```

Then, add the Index Module to your Medusa configuration in `medusa-config.ts`:

```ts title="medusa-config.ts"
module.exports = defineConfig({
  // ...
  modules: [
    // ...
    {
      resolve: "@medusajs/index",
    },
  ],
})
```

Finally, run the migrations to create the necessary tables for the Index Module in your database:

```bash
npx medusa db:migrate
```

> The index module only injests data when you start your Medusa server. So, to injest the [currently supported data models](#injested-data-models), start the Medusa application:

Reviewer: todo: This is not entirely true. There are two ways we ingest data:
1. We ingest data when we start the application, if the existing data in the index is stale
2. We ingest data whenever new entities (custom or core ones) are created, updated, or deleted
```suggestion
The index module only ingests data when you start your Medusa server. So, to injest the [currently supported data models](#injested-data-models), start the Medusa application:
```

Author: > We ingest data whenever new entities (custom or core ones) are created, updated, or deleted

Do you mean when we run migrations? Or when does that exactly happen?

```bash npm2yarn
npm run dev
```

> The injestion process may take long if you have a large set of products. You'll see the following messages in the logs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ingestion process may take a while if your product catalog is large. You'll see the following messages in the logs:
```

export const basicHighlights = [
  ["17", "id", "Filter products by their linked sales channel ID."]
]

```ts title="src/api/custom/products/route.ts" highlights={basicHighlights}
import {
  MedusaRequest,
  MedusaResponse,
} from "@medusajs/framework/http"

export const GET = async (
  req: MedusaRequest,
  res: MedusaResponse
) => {
  const query = req.scope.resolve("query")
  
  const { data: products } = await query.index({
    entity: "product",
    fields: ["*", "sales_channels.*"],
    filters: {
      sales_channels: {
        id: "sc_123"
      }
    }
  })

  res.json({ products })
}
```

This will return all products that are linked to the sales channel with the ID `sc_123`.

The `index` method accepts an object with the same properties as the `graph` method's parameter:

- `entity`: The data model's name, as specified in the first parameter of the `model.define` method used for the data model's definition.
- `fields`: An array of the data model’s properties, relations, and linked data models to retrieve in the result.
- `filters`: An object with the filters to apply on the data model's properties, relations, and linked data models that are injested.

---

> ## How to Injest Custom Data Models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to Ingest Custom Data Models
```

> Aside from the [injest Medusa data models](#injested-data-models), you can also injest your own custom data models into the Index Module. You can do so by defining a link between your custom data model and another injested data model, and setting the `filterable` property in the link definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from the [core data models](#injested-data-models), you can also ingest your own custom data models into the Index Module. You can do so by defining a link between your custom data model and one of the core data models, and setting the `filterable` property in the link definition.
```

<Note>

Read-only links are not supported by the Index Module.

</Note>

> For example, assuming you have a Brand Module with a Brand data model (as explained in the [Customizations](../../../customization/custom-features/module/page.mdx)), you can injest it into the Index Module using the `filterable` property in its link definition to the Product data model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, assuming you have a Brand Module with a Brand data model (as explained in the [Customizations](../../../customization/custom-features/module/page.mdx)), you can ingest it into the Index Module using the `filterable` property in its link definition to the Product data model:
```

) => {
  const query = req.scope.resolve("query")
  
  const { 
    data: products,
    metadata
  } = await query.index({
    entity: "product",
    fields: ["*", "brand.*"],
    filters: {
      brand: {
        name: "Acme"
      }
    },
    pagination: {
      take: 10,
      skip: 0,
    }
  })

  res.json({ products, ...metadata })
}
```

The `pagination` object accepts the following properties:

- `take`: The number of items to retrieve per page.
- `skip`: The number of items to skip before retrieving the items.

When the `pagination` property is set, the `index` method will also return a `metadata` property. `metadata` is an object with the following properties:

- `skip`: The number of items skipped.
- `take`: The number of items retrieved.
- `estimate_count`: The estimated total number of items in the database matching the query. This value is retrieved from the PostgreSQL query planner rather than using a `COUNT` query, so it may not be accurate for smaller data sets.

For example, this is the response returned by the above API route:

```json title="Example Response"
{
  "products": [
    // ...
  ],
  "skip": 0,
  "take": 10,
  "estimate_count": 100
}
```

---

> ## index Method Usage Examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Usage Examples
```

Author: Do you mind if we keep it? I want to keep it for search / AI assistant purposes

![Diagram showcasing how data is retrieved from the Index Module's data store](https://res.cloudinary.com/dza7lstvk/image/upload/v1747988533/Medusa%20Book/index-module_epurmt.jpg)

### Ingested Data Models

Currently, only the following core data models are ingested into Index when you install it:

- `Product`
- `ProductVariant`
- `Price`
- `SalesChannel`

Consequently, you can only index custom data models if they are linked to an ingested data model. You'll learn more about this in the [Ingest Custom Data Models](#how-to-ingest-custom-data-models) section.

Future versions may add more data models to the list.

---

## How to Install the Index Module

To install the Index Module, run the following command in your Medusa project to install its package:

```bash npm2yarn
npm install @medusajs/index
```

Then, add the Index Module to your Medusa configuration in `medusa-config.ts`:

```ts title="medusa-config.ts"
module.exports = defineConfig({
  // ...
  modules: [
    // ...
    {
      resolve: "@medusajs/index",
    },
  ],
})
```

Finally, run the migrations to create the necessary tables for the Index Module in your database:

```bash
npx medusa db:migrate
```

> The index module only ingests data when you start your Medusa server. So, to injest the [currently supported data models](#injested-data-models), start the Medusa application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The index module only ingests data when you start your Medusa server. So, to ingest the [currently supported data models](#ingested-data-models), start the Medusa application:
```

For example, to filter products by a sales channel ID:

export const basicHighlights = [
  ["17", "id", "Filter products by their linked sales channel ID."]
]

```ts title="src/api/custom/products/route.ts" highlights={basicHighlights}
import {
  MedusaRequest,
  MedusaResponse,
} from "@medusajs/framework/http"

export const GET = async (
  req: MedusaRequest,
  res: MedusaResponse
) => {
  const query = req.scope.resolve("query")
  
  const { data: products } = await query.index({
    entity: "product",
    fields: ["*", "sales_channels.*"],
    filters: {
      sales_channels: {
        id: "sc_123"
      }
    }
  })

  res.json({ products })
}
```

This will return all products that are linked to the sales channel with the ID `sc_123`.

The `index` method accepts an object with the same properties as the `graph` method's parameter:

- `entity`: The data model's name, as specified in the first parameter of the `model.define` method used for the data model's definition.
- `fields`: An array of the data model’s properties, relations, and linked data models to retrieve in the result.

> - `filters`: An object with the filters to apply on the data model's properties, relations, and linked data models that are injested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `filters`: An object with the filters to apply on the data model's properties, relations, and linked data models that are ingested.
```

---

## How to Ingest Custom Data Models

> Aside from the [core data models](#injested-data-models), you can also ingest your own custom data models into the Index Module. You can do so by defining a link between your custom data model and one of the core data models, and setting the `filterable` property in the link definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from the [core data models](#ingested-data-models), you can also ingest your own custom data models into the Index Module. You can do so by defining a link between your custom data model and one of the core data models, and setting the `filterable` property in the link definition.
```

> Aside from the [core data models](#injested-data-models), you can also ingest your own custom data models into the Index Module. You can do so by defining a link between your custom data model and one of the core data models, and setting the `filterable` property in the link definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from the [core data models](#ingested-data-models), you can also ingest your own custom data models into the Index Module. You can do so by defining a link between your custom data model and one of the core data models, and setting the `filterable` property in the link definition.
```

<Note>

Read-only links are not supported by the Index Module.

</Note>

For example, assuming you have a Brand Module with a Brand data model (as explained in the [Customizations](../../../customization/custom-features/module/page.mdx)), you can ingest it into the Index Module using the `filterable` property in its link definition to the Product data model:

export const filterableHighlights = [
  ["12", "filterable", "Inject Brand by setting its filterable properties."]
]

```ts title="src/links/product-brand.ts" highlights={filterableHighlights}
import BrandModule from "../modules/brand"
import ProductModule from "@medusajs/medusa/product"
import { defineLink } from "@medusajs/framework/utils"

export default defineLink(
  {
    linkable: ProductModule.linkable.product,
    isList: true,
  },
  {
    linkable: BrandModule.linkable.brand,
    filterable: ["id", "name"],
  },
)
```

> The `filterable` property is an array of property names in the data model that can be filtered using the `index` method. When the `filterable` property is set, the Index Module will injest into its data store the custom data model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `filterable` property is an array of property names in the data model that can be filtered using the `index` method. When the `filterable` property is set, the Index Module will ingest into its data store the custom data model.
```
